

    Move and Sort Game
    ==================

Please use a monospacing font to read this file.

This program must run under Windows95 or NT. A modern graphics card 
required as well (No palette programming).

In this game, the player has to sort numbered bricks. This bricks can be 
moved by clicking with the mouse. If the bricks are sorted properly a 
detailed message is displayed. --  The game can be played in three different 
languages: German, English and Portuguese. --  The program was written by 
a Forther with restricted experience. It was written to get experience in 
using the new Win32Forth working together with Windows and other programming 
tools. --  The author wanted to achieve as many as possible out of these 
aims:

    it can easily be played by children,
    it is nice to look at,
    something moves,
    the use of various modern tools for Windows programming,
    the use of the Help System with references between different chapters.

The program was written for use on a contemporary computer. Modern 32 bit
programming under control of a modern operating system.

The result was a lot of new experience for the author, but unfortunately not 
a good or particularly interesting program to show to other programmers. -- 
The comments of the sources are written in German language only.

------------------------------

The .zip file contains an executable file and all sources ...

    1 .exe    (Turnkey)   ready to play
    3 .hlp    Help-files  in German, English and Portuguese
    3 .wri    Abouts      in German, English and Portuguese

    1 Readme.rtf     (English) Loading and access to the sources
    1 VIP_Liste.rtf  (German)  List of all VIPs who got a copy so far

    In these files the comments written in German language ...

    16 .f     sources Win32Forth (small files),
    1  .rc    dialog resources,
    1  .bmp   bitmap with flags of Germany, Britain and Brazil
    1  .res   compiled from .rc and .bmp,
    1  .ico   the icon

    These files in German, English and Portuguese language

    3  .rtf   help source
    3  .hpj   help commands

------------------------------

There are two small changes with regard to the original Win32Forth source, so
a MakeForth is recommended. Avoidance of this MakeForth is discussed in 
Readme.rtf. The files which are delivered here, work under a changed Forth 
system.

    In dialog.f the following was added:

        5 VALUE ResType

    The word 'find-dialog-ID' will be able to search different types
    of resources.

    --------------------------

    In primutil.f major changes were done at the word ,"Text" in order
    to translate the many strings appearing in all the small items.

    There is a new

        0 VALUE Sprache             \ german word for language.

    If Sprache =  NULL , no changes of Win32Forth will appear.

    If Sprache >  NULL , the definition of this word is changed to:

        ,"Text"  ( Addr0  --  )     \ Addr0 = Address of a text in the
                                    \ central string table in the FIRST
                                    \ language (the other languages
                                    \ follow immediately)

    The central table with the strings in all languages is built by
    ,"Text" while Sprache = NULL .

    Sprache is set to nonzero by an initial dialog which asks for the
    desired language.

    ,"Text" now picks the PROPER text according to the amount of Sprache
    out of the central table of strings and places it at 'here'.

    Details see StringTabelle.f and MultLan.f .

------------------------------

Author of 'Move and Sort' program is:

  Name                  Ulrich Richter
  E-Mail  		u.richter@mhb.gun.de

