   Color Forth User Notes - as modified for operation with DECB by smp, February 2015


    Talbot Microsystems Color Forth was originally available as a cartridge for the
    Radio Shack Color Computer, circa 1981.
    
    A copy of the original manual is available on the Internet:
        ColorForth v1.0 (Talbot Microsystems).pdf
        http://www.colorcomputerarchive.com/coco/Documents/Manuals/Programming/
    
    The original manual is an indispensable aid to understanding the function and
    capabilities of Color Forth.  It contains all the source code originally
    compiled into the Color Forth cartridge.
    
    Here, I note only the updates I performed to get the code to operate properly in
    conjunction with the Color Computer Disk Extended Color Basic.
    
    Not all of the Color Forth functionality is available.  Cassette I/O was cut out
    in favor of the new disk I/O.  Some of the Forth code has been left for the user
    to decide to enter on your own.
    
    New commands available in Color Forth:
    
    DIR (Directory)
    This command will show the directory of the current disk.
    
    LSCR (Load Screens)
    This command is used to load Forth code screens 1-8 from disk into memory.
    Upon receiving LSCR<CR> Color Forth will take up to 8 characters as the file
    name.  If you enter all 8 characters, Color Forth will immediately operate on
    that as the file name.  If the file name has fewer than 8 characters, you must
    enter a <CR> to tell Color Forth you have finished the file name.
    
    SSCR (Save Screens)
    This command is used to save Forth code screens 1-8 onto disk.
    Upon receiving SSCR<CR> Color Forth will take up to 8 characters as the file
    name.  If you enter all 8 characters, Color Forth will immediately operate on
    that as the file name.  If you want a file name with fewer than 8 characters,
    you must enter a <CR> to tell Color Forth you have finished the file name.
    
    BASIC (Return to DECB)
    This command executes a cold start of Disk Extended Color Basic.
    This command provides a proper exit from Color Forth without performing a power
    cycle or hitting the reset button.
    
    
   Color Forth User Notes - as modified for operation with DECB by smp, February 2015


    Description of the .DSK images:
    
    CCF-EXEC.DSK
    
    CC-FORTH.BIN
    This is the executable code for Color Forth as modified for operation with DECB.
    
    CCF-MISC.BIN
    This is a set of miscellaneous extensions to the Color Forth nucleus from the
    original source code listings.  This code must be loaded prior to attempting to
    load and use the editor.
    
    CCF-ED.BIN
    This is the code for the editor.
    Consult the original Color Forth manual for information on using the editor.
    The CCF-MISC screens must be loaded first, for the editor to function properly.
    
    CCF-DOLR
    This is a small Forth program to calculate all the ways to make $1.00 (US)
    from change (pennies, nickels, dimes and quarters).

    CCF-SRC.DSK
    
    CC-FORTH.ASM
    This is the source code file for Color Forth as modified for operation with DECB.
    
    CCF-MISC.ASM
    This is the source code file for a set of miscellaneous extensions to the Color
    Forth nucleus from the original source code listings.
    
    CCF-ED.ASM
    This is the source code file for the Color Forth Editor from the original source
    code listings.
    
    CCF-DOLR.ASM
    This is the source code file for a small Forth program to calculate all the ways
    to make $1.00 (US)from change (pennies, nickels, dimes and quarters).






   Color Forth User Notes - as modified for operation with DECB by smp, February 2015


    Loading and running Color Forth:
    LOADM"CC-FORTH"
    EXEC
    
    Color Forth will sign on with a beep, and:
    COLOR FORTH 1.1
    COPYRIGHT 1981 TJZ & RJT
    UPDATED FOR DECB, JAN 2015, SMP
    
    You will see the familiar Color Computer blinking cursor, and Color Forth is now
    waiting for commands.
    
    Please consult the original manual, as well as other sources for information on
    the Forth language and how to use it.
    
    Once Color Forth is loaded and running, if you want to add the miscellaneous
    extensions to the Color Forth nucleus:
    
    LSCR<CR>CCF-MISC OK
    4 3 2 1 LOAD LOAD LOAD LOAD<CR> OK
    
    In both of the command lines above, the OK is the response from Color Forth that
    the operation has been completed successfully.
    
    If you want to add the editor (after you have added the miscellaneous extensions):
    
    LSCR<CR>CCF-ED<CR> OK
    7 6 5 4 3 2 LOAD LOAD LOAD LOAD LOAD LOAD<CR> OK
    
    The editor is now available for use.  Find directions in the original manual.
    
    If you want to add the DOLLAR program and try it out:
    LSCR<CR>CCF-DOLR OK
    1 LOAD OK
    DOLLAR<CR>
    
    Good luck!  I hope these user notes are helpful to get you operating with
    Color Forth as modified for operation with DECB.
    
    smp, February 2015
    